= Sinatra R18n Plugin

Sinatra extension that provides i18n support to translate your web application.

It is just a wrap for R18n core library. See R18n documentation for more 
information.

== Features

* It has special support for countries with two official languages. If there
  isn’t translation in user locale, it will be found in locales, which
  user may know (not only in default locale). For example, many people in 
  Belarus can understand Russian, and locale has information about it.
* It can format numbers and time to the rules of the user locale, translate
  month and week days name and give other locale information.
* It has translation for commons words, like “OK”, “Cancel”, etc.
* It storage translation in rich YAML format. You can put procedures and
  pluralization (“1 comment”, “5 comments”) or create you own filters.

== How To
1. Create translations dir <tt>./i18n/</tt>.
2. Add file with translation in some language. For example
   <tt>./i18n/en.yml</tt>:
   
     post:
       friends: Post only for friends
       tags: Post tags: %1
     
     comments: !!pl
       0: No comments
       1: One comment
       n: %1 comments
     
     html: !!html
       <b>Don't escape HTML</b>
   
3. Add R18n to your Sinatra application:
   
     require 'sinatra/r18n'
   
4. Add locale to your URLs. For example:
   
     get '/:locale/posts/:id' do
       @post = Post.find(params[:id])
       haml :post
     end
   
   Or you save locale in session, when user change it:
   
     before do
      session[:locale] = params[:locale] if params[:locale]
     end
   
5. Use translation messages in view. For example in HAML:
     
     %p= i18n.post.friends
     %p= i18n.post.tags(@post.tags.join(', '))
     
     %h2= i18n.comments(@post.comments.size)
   
6. Print localized time and numbers. For example:
   
     i18n.l @post.created_at, :human
   
7. Print available translations. For example in HAML:
   
     %ul
       - i18n.translations.each_pair do |locale, title|
         %li
           %a{ href: "/#{locale}/" }= title

== License
R18n is licensed under the GNU Lesser General Public License version 3.
You can read it in LICENSE file or in http://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl.html.

== Author
Andrey “A.I.” Sitnik <andrey@sitnik.ru>
