= R18n for Rails

R18n-rails is a gem to add out-of-box R18n support to Rails I18n.

It is a wrapper for R18n Rails API and R18n core libraries. See R18n core
documentation for more information.

== Features

R18n for Rails is fully compatibile with Rails I18n, and add extra features:

=== R18n Syntax

You can use more compact, explicit and ruby-style syntax.

Translations in R18n format will be loaded from <tt>app/i18n/_locale_.yml</tt>:

  user:
    name: User name is %1
    count: !!pl
      0: No users
      1: 1 user
      n: %1 users

R18n extends +t+ helper to add optional R18n syntax:

  t.user.name('John')      #=> "User name is John"
  t.user.count(5)          #=> "5 users"
  t.not.exists | 'default' #=> "default"

=== Filters

R18n has flexible architecture based on filters. Variables, pluralization,
untranslated are common filters, and you can change them all. For example,
write untranslated keys to file:

  R18n::Filters.add(::R18n::Untranslated, :write_untranslated) do
  |v, c, translated, untranslated, path|
    File.open('untranslated.list', 'w') do |io|
      io.puts(path)
    end
  end

R18n already has filters for HTML escaping, lambdas, Textile and Markdown:

  hi: !!markdown
    **Hi**, people!
  greater: !!escape
    1 < 2 is true

  i18n.hi      #=> "<p><strong>Hi</strong>, people!</p>"
  i18n.greater #=> "1 &lt; 2 is true"

=== Model Translation

R18n can add i18n support for your ActiveRecord model and any other class:

1. Add separate columns for all supported translations:
   
     def self.up
       create_table :posts do |t|
         t.string :title_en
         t.string :title_ru
       end
     end
   
2. Add virtual method +title+, which will use <tt>title_<i>locale</i></tt>
   methods to find actual translation:
   
     class Post < ActiveRecord::Base
       include R18n::Translated
       translations :title
     end
     
     # For Russian user
     post = Post.new
     post.title_en = 'Post'
     post.title_ru = 'Запись'
     post.title = 'Запись'
     
     post.title = 'Другая' # will use title_ru, by first user's locale

=== Time Fomatters

R18n add +full+ time formatter based on locale info:

  # English
  l Time.now, :full #=> "1st of December, 2009 12:00"
  
  # French
  l Time.now, :full #=> "1er décembre 2009 12:00"

=== Locales

R18n contains locales info, so it supports locale pluralization and fallback
rules for non-English locales out-of-box:

  # Russian have different plural rules:
  user:
    count: !!pl
      0: Нет пользователей
      1: %1 пользователь
      2: %1 пользователя
      n: %1 пользователей
  
  t.user.count(2)  #=> "2 пользователя"
  t.user.count(21) #=> "21 пользователь"

=== Autodetect User Locales

R18n automatically generate fallbacks for current user, based on
user locales list from HTTP_ACCEPT_LANGUAGE, locale info (in some countries
people know several languages), and default locale.

For example, if user know Kazakh and German, R18n will try find translations in:
Kazakh → German → Russian (second language in Kazakhstan) → English (default
locale).

=== Separated I18n

You can create another R18n I18n instance with another languages. For example,
to send e-mail for English admin on error with French user:

  puts I18n.t :error # Show error in French
  
  admin_i18n = R18n::I18n.new(@admin_locales, Rails.root + 'app/i18n')
  send_email(admin_i18n.error_messages)

== How To

1. Add <tt>r18n-rails</tt> gem to your <tt>config/environment.rb</tt>:
   
     config.gem 'r18n-rails'
   
   Now R18n will autodetect user locales.
2. Define your way to set locale manually. R18n will find it in
   <tt>params[:locale]</tt> or <tt>session[:locale]</tt>. Best way is a put
   optional locale prefix to URLs:
   
       map.connect ':controller/:action'
       map.connect ':locale/:controller/:action'
   
3. Print available translations, to choose from them manually (and to helpsearch
   engines):

     <ul>
     <% r18n.available_locales.each do |locale| %>
         <li>
           <a href="/<%= locale.code %>/"><%= locale.title %></a>
         </li>
     <% end %>
     </ul>
   
4. Translations in I18n format are stored in
   <tt>config/locales/_locale_.yml</tt>:
   
     en:
       user:
         name: "User name is {{name}}"
         count:
           zero: "No users"
           one:  "One user"
           many: "{{count}} users"
   
   Translations in R18n format go to <tt>app/i18n/_locale_.yml</tt>:
   
     user:
       name: User name is %1
       count: !!pl
         0: No users
         1: 1 user
         n: %1 users
   
5. Use translated messages in views. You can use Rails I18n syntax:
   
     t 'user.name', :name => 'John'
     t 'user.count', :count => 5
   
   or R18n syntax:
   
     t.user.name(:name => 'John') # for Rails I18n named variables
     t.user.name('John')          # for R18n variables
     t.user.count(5)
   
6. Print dates and numbers in user’s tradition:
   
     l Date.today, :standard #=> "20/12/2009"
     l Time.now,   :full     #=> "20th of December, 2009 12:00"
     l 1234.5                #=> "1,234.5"

7. Translate models:
   
   1. Add to migration columns for each of the supported locales, named as
      <tt><i>name</i>_<i>locale</i></tt>:
      
         t.string :title_en
         t.string :title_ru
         
         t.string :text_en
         t.string :text_ru
      
   2. Add <tt>R18n::Translated</tt> mixin to model:
      
        class Post < ActiveRecord::Base
          include R18n::Translated
      
   3. Call +translations+ method in model with all columns to be translated:
      
          translations :title, :text
   
      Now model will have virtual methods +title+, +text+, <tt>title=</tt>
      and <tt>text=</tt>, which will call +title_ru+ or +title_en+ and etc based
      on current user locales.
   
   You can use <tt>R18n::Translated</tt> mixin for any Ruby class, not only for
   ActiveRecord models.

== License

R18n is licensed under the GNU Lesser General Public License version 3.
You can read it in LICENSE file or in http://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl.html.

== Author

Andrey “A.I.” Sitnik <andrey@sitnik.ru>
