= R18n Rails API

Rails I18n compatibility for R18n:
* filters to work with named variables in Rails translation format;
* R18n loader for Rails I18n translation format;
* R18n backend.

== How To

=== Variables
After require <tt>r18n-rails-api</tt> you can use named variables in any
translations:

  greeting: "Hi, {{name}}"
  users: !!pl
    1: One user
    n: {{count}} users

  require 'r18n-rails-api'

  i18n.greeting(:name => 'John') #=> "Hi, John"
  i18n.users(:count => 5) #=> "5 users"

=== Rails translations
You can use <tt>R18n::Loader::Rails</tt> to load translations from
<tt>I18n.load_path</tt>:

i18n/en.yml:
  en:
    posts:
      one: One post
      many: {{count}} posts

example.rb:
  require 'r18n-rails-api'

  I18n.load_path = ['i18n/en.yml']
  i18n = R18n::I18n.new('en', R18n::Loader::Rails)
  
  i18n.posts(:count => 5) #=> "5 posts"

=== Backend
You can use R18n as backend for Rails I18n:

  require 'r18n-rails-api'

  R18n.set R18n::I18n.new('en', 'path/to/translation')
  I18n.backend = R18n::Backend
  
  I18n.l Time.now, :format => :full #=> "6th of December, 2009 22:44"
  I18n.t :greeting, :name => 'John' #=> "Hi, John"
  I18n.t :users, :count => 5        #=> "5 users"

== R18n Features

* Nice Ruby-style syntax.
* Filters.
* Flexible locales.
* Custom translations loaders.
* Translation support for any classes.
* Time and number localization.
* Several user language support.

== License

R18n is licensed under the GNU Lesser General Public License version 3.
You can read it in LICENSE file or in http://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl.html.

== Author

Andrey “A.I.” Sitnik <andrey@sitnik.ru>
